# Raven Backup

Raven Backup is a desktop application built in Python 3.10 with a Tkinter GUI for performing local and remote backups using `rsync`. It supports scheduling tasks via `cron`, compressing during copy, incremental backups, and managing symbolic links.  
It was developed on the GNU/Linux operating system, leveraging its features and executing system commands via subprocesses.

---

## 🚀 Features

- Local and remote backups (SSH)
- Incremental backup support
- Option to compress during copy
- Delete files at destination if removed from source
- Symbolic link management: preserve or copy target files
- Task scheduler with `cron`
- Multilingual interface (Spanish / English)
- Secure password storage using AES encryption (Fernet)
- Real-time logging and status tracking

---

## 🛠️ Requirements

- Python 3.10+
- Module `venv`for Python 
- `tkinter` 
- `git` (to clone the repository)
- `cryptography` (encrypts passwords)
- `babel` (for translation compilation)
- `rsync` installed on the system

---

## 📦 Installation

1. The easiest way is download from repository the installation script [`ìnstall_raven.sh`](https://github.com/DDorfm/raven_backup/blob/main/install/install_raven.sh),
then run it from the command line(download directory works fine). Do not forget to `chmod +x` on it.
  This file will clone the repository, create an isolated runtime environment and generate the launch script. It also created a desktop menu shortcut.


2. If you prefer to do it manually

   - Clone the repository

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/DDorfm/raven_backup.git
   cd raven-backup
	```
	- Create a virtual environment  in `raven_backup` directory.
	```bash
	python3 -m venv venv
	```
	- Install requirements
	```bash
	pip install -r requirements.txt
	```
	- Run the app:
	```bash
	python3 raven_backup.py
	```
>Note: git clone will download the entire repository, including the automatic installation script install_raven.sh, located in the install/ directory. If you chose the manual option, you may delete this directory and its contents.
---

## ⚙️ Initial Configuration

1. Select source files/directories using the Choose files or Choose directories buttons.

2. Define the destination (local or remote: user@host:path).

3. Configure options:

	```bash
	- Delete at destination if removed from source

	- Compress during copy

	- Incremental backup

	- Symbolic link handling
	```

4. For remote access:

	```bash
	- Choose access type: password or public key

	- Specify SSH port and password (if applicable)
	```
> Note: raven_backup creates a hidden configuration file named `.raven_config.conf`
Do not edit this file manually, nor any other file created by the application.
---
## 🌐 Translations

The application compiles the language file automatically at startup 
— no manual compilation is required by the user. Currently, Spanish 
and English are supported.

---
## 🛡️ Security
Passwords are stored encrypted using Fernet.
The .secret.key file has restricted permissions (chmod 600).
No credentials are stored in plain text.

---

## ⚖️ License

Raven backup comes with **ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY**. This is free software, and you
are  welcome to redistribute it under the terms of the GNU General Public License.
Free to use, modify, and distribute — as long as any derivative version is also
free.

Rights and obligations under [**GNU GPL v3.0**](LICENSE).


---

## 🐞 Reporting Bugs
If you encounter any issues, please contact danieldorfman@proton.me 
and include:

	- Problem description
	- Step-by-step reproduction instructions
	- Operating system and Python version






